South Africans with green economy development projects and programmes will be pleased to know the government-owned Development Bank of Southern Africa (DBSA) has announced the availability of funding for such initiatives through its Green Fund. This fund has been set up to contribute towards a wide range of goals in transitioning SA to a greener economy. This includes the financing of projects and programmes that reduce the impact of climate change. The main objectives of the Green Fund are to promote high-impact, innovative, low-carbon and inclusive programmes, while reinforcing climate policy objectives and sustainable development imperatives that align with the country's social, economic and environmental priorities. It also aims to build an evidence base for the advancement of a climate-resilient and inclusive economy, and to mobilise and leverage additional resources to support the country’s transition to a low-carbon economy. The Green Fund  has three main areas of focus: 1. Supporting a just transition to a low-carbon economy by: 2. Promoting the market-based adoption of integrated biogas technologies in small-, medium- and micro-scale enterprises to promote the development of the renewable energy sector and the green economy. 3. Providing support for youth development, including skills development and enterprise development, within a sustainability context. The Green Fund's investment criteria are designed to support the national development plan  and the UN sustainable development goals. As such, the fund will prioritise projects that: Projects that are in advanced stages of development, are strategically aligned with the objectives of the Green Fund and demonstrate strong potential to reach bankability with the support of the DBSA, will also be considered. To apply for funding, send an electronic introduction of the project or programme to greenfund@dbsa.org. This introduction must include: Applications should demonstrate commercial viability and will be assessed through a competitive process. The DBSA has the sole discretion to respond to multiple green economy objectives in making its selection, including climate and environmental impact, and gender mainstreaming potential for the project. This article was paid for by DBSA